The Pragmatic Programmer
========================

I recently read the newly-released 20th anniversary edition of Thomas and Hunt's 1999 classic The Pragmatic
Programmer, and I'm wanting to share my thoughts on it.

I attempted to read the first edition of this book when I was in college, probably around 2012 when it was 11 years old,
and it was so outdated that I couldn't bring myself to finish it. I'm sure that take came from a combination of the
book's datedness and my own ignorance of which pieces of knowledge are truly timeless. Either way, I was excited that
the 20th anniversary edition coincided with me learning more about how to lead cross-functional project teams, not to
mention my ongoing growth as a technical manager and programmer.

This book is built around a series of 100 "tips" that comprise the "pragmatic philosophy" that the authors have
developed over a career spanning more than 30 years. Having read the book provides helpful context when I go back to
reference the list, which I'm likely to do frequently. This is a book of opinions backed up by experience and logic, and
it strengthened my perspective on how to approach making software.

The Pragmatic Programmer's influence on Parse.ly is apparent, and I think it would be even if I wasn't already aware
that @amontalenti had read the first edition years ago. For better or worse, I learned literally everything I know about
professional software gardening from the foundation that Andrew and the team built for me. In this milieu, I picked up
concepts like "good enough" software, tracer bullets, prototypes, orthogonality, DSLs, DRY, the UNIX philosophy,
decoupling, the importance of naming, true "agility", cargo cults, and so much more - you know, programmer stuff.

What surprised me most during my read wasn't that there was overlap between these ideas I learned at Parse.ly and the
Pragmatic Philosophy, but just how big the overlap was. With few exceptions and probably some omissions, this book
provides a guide to the philosophy of engineering that I've seen applied for years at Parse.ly. Thus, reading it and
applying its ideas in your daily work is likely to take you far on this team.

Here are some of the tips that I'm carrying with me in my always-growing knowledge portfolio:

You Have Agency - When someone complains about their frustration on their team or project, ask "why can't you change
it?" This is an incredibly powerful mindset that reminds one that they're human rather than a cog in a machine.

Don’t Live with Broken Windows - Fix bad designs, wrong decisions, and poor code when you see them.

Good Design Is Easier to Change Than Bad Design - "Easier to Change" or ETC is central to the pragmatic philosophy.
Every piece of guidance about writing code in this book supports making code easier to change.

There Are No Final Decisions - the crux of the "generative culture" that Accelerate espouses

Keep Knowledge in Plain Text - We recently moved our technical documentation from Notion to Markdown files in git, so
this stood out to me

“select” Isn't Broken - The problem is in your code, not the standard library. A little like Occam's Razor.

Refactor Early, Refactor Often - Refactoring shouldn't be a stop-the-world event, but an ongoing activity. "You have
agency" to "fix broken windows", because "there are no final decisions".

Requirements Are Learned in a Feedback Loop - This is a true statement whether a project admits it or not, and it's the
most succinct rebuttal of waterfall-style development I've heard.

Agile Is Not a Noun; Agile Is How You Do Things - This linguistic battle is too foregone to attempt even for me, but the
authors are correct here.

Sign Your Work - I love this. Beyond git blame, putting your name on a piece of code you built encourages a craftsperson
mindset that takes pride in the work. Even though most of what we make at Parse.ly is the intellectual property of A8C,
I think it's still meaningful to take some ownership.

This is just a wonderful book. It's the first of the #parselyengreadinglist that I unconditionally recommend to everyone
on the +parselyproductteam. Read it and take pride in your work.
