Resilient Management
====================

I recently read Resilient Management by Lara Hogan after hearing about it on @matt's Distributed podcast. Lara's
approach to people-management as illustrated by both the podcast interview and the book resonated deeply with me and
filled me with new ideas about how to work with engineers.

The primary audience for this book seems to be new or inexperienced managers, a group I consider myself squarely a part
of. It consists mostly of concrete guidance on how to perform the day-to-day of people management, which for me is
a welcome counterpoint to the more theoretical approach of books like High Output Management or An Elegant Puzzle. A lot
of the juicy stuff from Resilient Management is closely reproduced on the author's blog, which is a fun bonus.

I'm taking with me a lot of new or refined concepts from this read. Here are the top ones that will stick in my mind.

BICEPS core needs is Paloma Medina's theory of basic needs that all humans share - Belonging, Improvement, Choice,
Equality, Predictability, and Significance. Understanding which of these most commonly feel threatened for different
teammates can inform how you work with them. When one or more of these needs is threatened, we can get "grumpy".

Tracking one's own BICEPS core needs on a daily basis

Grumpiness, also referred to as "amygdala hijacking" or "fight or flight response", is a state where logical, rational
thought is suspended and the "lizard brain" takes over. Knowing what commonly triggers this response for an individual
tells a manager so much about how to communicate with them. It's also helpful to be conscious of when one's own
experience has been amygdala-hijacked.

What are you optimizing for? This question helps frame one's style of working or managing in terms of their core values
or interests. Asking it about oneself or others can resolve tension between opposing ideas or approaches. For example,
a manager who optimizes for group learning will work differently from one who optimizes for high shipping velocity.

Hogan provides a "mad lib" that can help frame an understanding of one's own optimizations and management "style".
Here's my first attempt at filling it out for myself (the blanks from the mad lib are italic):

I'm an unassuming leader who values emotional openness and technical curiosity. You'll see this when I use open
questions to encourage teammates to participate and explore. I support my team by empathizing with them and
contextualizing organizational changes, and I stay aligned with company values by getting gut-checks from my leadership
team. I thrive in a curious, learning, well-documented environment. I commit to being a good listener.

Mentoring/Coaching/Sponsoring/Delivering feedback. These are terms that are thrown around quite a bit in the engineering
management literature, and this book has the clearest distinction between them that I've come across. Thinking of each
as a distinct tool to be deployed at different moments, and considering one's default mode as a manager are helpful
exercises.

Feedback equation - a handy back-pocket framework for delivering feedback in a way that might actually land (positive or
negative).

RACI matrices (Responsible/Accountable/Consulted/Informed) are tools that frame individuals' involvement in a given
project. For me, this concept would have been especially useful in Parse.ly's "ops as gatekeeper" phase.

Communication media - having been raised as an engineer in a culture that deeply valued asynchronous communication and
minimal meetings, I've recently been rediscovering the time and place where synchronous "face to face" video calls are
the best tool for the job. Hogan articulates the strengths and weaknesses of different communication channels clearly.

Communication energies are Hogan's metaphor for the different styles that one can embody via words, tone, body language,
and more. As someone who has gotten feedback many times that my communication tends toward coldness or aloofness,
thinking of these energies as "cards" that can be "played" as the situation calls for is liberating. It depersonalizes
such feedback and frames the mode not as natural or inherent to one's person, but as the "default". My default mode is
probably black, and purple might be the hardest for me to play.

Hogan's communication energy "cards"

Energy-level tracking - Hogan makes the observation that different activities require different "brains". A familiar
example is the distinction between deep-focus "maker time" and expansive, context-switching "manager time". She
recommends grouping meetings that use the same brain to minimize brain-switching that leads to energy drain.

Manager voltron is the idea that no one person will provide every type of support that you need. Thus, you can assemble
a network of people who support you in different ways. Hogan suggests ways to add people to the voltron and even offers
a bingo card for keeping track of it.

I enthusiastically recommend this book to anyone interested in helping a team get stronger, whether they're a manager or
an individual contributor.
